TEST---77337: Builders Plan Preflights and Support Bundles (#1205)
replicatedhq/replicated-docs: docs/vendor/preflight-helm-defining.mdx

import PreflightsSpecLocations from "../partials/preflights/_preflights-spec-locations.mdx"
import SecretsConfig from "../partials/preflights/_secrets-config.mdx"
import PreflightsAbout from "../partials/preflights/_preflights-about.mdx"
import PreflightsDefine from "../partials/preflights/_preflights-define.mdx"
import PreflightsDefineXref from "../partials/preflights/_preflights-define-xref.mdx"
import PreflightsCrNote from "../partials/preflights/_preflights-cr-note.mdx"
import AnalyzersNote from "../partials/preflights/_analyzers-note.mdx"
import RedactorsAbout from "../partials/redactors/_redactors-about.mdx"
import PreflightSbHelmTemplates from "../partials/preflights/_preflight-sb-helm-templates.mdx"

# Define Preflight Checks for Helm Installations

This topic provides a basic understanding and some key considerations about preflight checks for Helm installations to help guide you in defining them for your application.

## About Helm Preflight Checks

<PreflightsAbout/>

Preflight checks run using a `helm template` command before running the installation to confirm the target cluster has the resources required for a successful installation.

> ## Input Kind

Author: Nice, thanks!

import PreflightsSpecLocations from "../partials/preflights/_preflights-spec-locations.mdx"
import SecretsConfig from "../partials/preflights/_secrets-config.mdx"
import PreflightsAbout from "../partials/preflights/_preflights-about.mdx"
import PreflightsDefine from "../partials/preflights/_preflights-define.mdx"
import PreflightsDefineXref from "../partials/preflights/_preflights-define-xref.mdx"
import PreflightsCrNote from "../partials/preflights/_preflights-cr-note.mdx"
import AnalyzersNote from "../partials/preflights/_analyzers-note.mdx"
import RedactorsAbout from "../partials/redactors/_redactors-about.mdx"
import PreflightSbHelmTemplates from "../partials/preflights/_preflight-sb-helm-templates.mdx"

# Define Preflight Checks for Helm Installations

This topic provides a basic understanding and some key considerations about preflight checks for Helm installations to help guide you in defining them for your application.

## About Helm Preflight Checks

<PreflightsAbout/>

Preflight checks run using a `helm template` command before running the installation to confirm the target cluster has the resources required for a successful installation.

## Input Kind

> When you run `helm template` command as stdin, the command filters the stream and runs the following inputs:

Reviewer: you run `helm template  <args>` to produce a stream of stdout, and pipe the result of that to `preflight -`.  The `preflight` command filters the stream.

-  Secret (`kind: Secret`)
-  ConfigMap (`kind: ConfigMap`)
-  Preflight custom resource (`kind: Preflight`)

All of these input options allow customization of preflight checks based on values unique to the customer, using Helm templates with conditional statements.

Secrets and Config maps are installed in the cluster. Preflight custom resources cannot be installed in the cluster, and so must be wrapped in a condition.

## Create a Secret

<SecretsConfig/> 

You must include the following:

- `Label` - Label the secret definition as `troubleshoot.sh/kind: preflight`
- `stringData` - Specify a `stringData` field with a key named `preflight.yaml` so that the preflight binary can use this Secret when it runs from the CLI

> - `{{ .Release.Namespace }}` to ensure that the specification is scoped to the release namespace.

Reviewer 2: I notice that the example below has `.Release.Name` Is this supposed to say `.Release.Namespace` or `.Release.Name`? (I suspect name? Since the field is `name:`)

> - `{{ .Release.Namespace }}` to ensure that the specification is scoped to the release namespace.

Author: Not sure I understand which one you're referring to? Is  this the one that isn't required? It is in the example under `metadata`

 "`name`: Specify a `"{{ .Release.Namespace }}-NAME` to ensure that the specification is scoped to the release namespace. Replace `NAME` with the namespace where the release will be deployed.

> - `{{ .Release.Namespace }}` to ensure that the specification is scoped to the release namespace.

Author: We talked and this has been removed now.

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Secret
metadata:
  labels:
    troubleshoot.sh/kind: preflight
  name: "{{ .Release.Name }}-preflight-config"
stringData:
  preflight.yaml: |
    apiVersion: troubleshoot.sh/v1beta2
    kind: Preflight
    metadata:
      name: preflight-sample
    spec:
      collectors:[]
      analyzers:[]
```

Next, define the preflight checks specification by adding collectors and analyzers. Optionally, you can add to the default redactors. For more information, see [Define the Preflight Checks Specification](#preflights).

## Create a Preflight Custom Resource

> The Preflight custom resource lets you provide preflight checks in a Helm template. If you use this input, you must use conditional statements in the custom resource because it is not installed in the cluster. Instead, the custom resource is read using stdin.

Reviewer: it is not able to be installed in the cluster because the definition is not installed.

Author: Thanks. I changed "it" to "custom resource definition". So, it ends up as "If you use this input, you must use conditional statements in the custom resource because the custom resrouce definition is not installed in the cluster."

> The Preflight custom resource lets you provide preflight checks in a Helm template. If you use this input, you must use conditional statements in the custom resource because it is not installed in the cluster. Instead, the custom resource is read using stdin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Preflight custom resource lets you provide preflight checks in a Helm template without using `stringData`. If you use this input, you must use conditional statements in the custom resource because it is not able to be installed in the cluster.
```

<PreflightsCrNote/>

To define a Preflight custom resource as a template:

> 1. Create a Preflight custom resource YAML file using `kind: Preflight`. Wrap the custom resource template in an `{{ if` so that it is only rendered when specified in the `values.yaml` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Create a Preflight custom resource YAML file using `kind: Preflight`. Wrap the custom resource template in an `{{ if` so that it is only rendered when specified in the `values.yaml` file or on the `helm` CLI.
```

    **Example**:

    ```yaml
    {{ if .Values.renderpreflights }}
    apiVersion: troubleshoot.sh/v1beta2
    kind: Preflight
    metadata:
      name: example-name
    spec:
      collectors: []
      analyzers: []
    {{ end }}
    ```

> 1. Configure your `values.yaml` file with Helm templating to support the Preflight custom resource.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Configure your `values.yaml` file to enable the Preflight custom resource.
```

> 1. Configure your `values.yaml` file with Helm templating to support the Preflight custom resource.

Reviewer: alternately, rather than edit the values.yaml:

```
helm template oci://chartlocation --values values.yaml --set renderpreflights=true | preflight -
```

Author: Paige and I decided to only document one way of running it for now, in the topic "Running Preflights for Helm Installation". For this configuration topic, we think the developer will already know that they can use the --set flag as an alternative method to editing.

  **Example:**

  ```yaml

>   renderpreflights: example-name

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  renderpreflights: true
```

>   ```

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure if this matters, but should this show `renderpreflights` set to `true`? Maybe `{{ if .Values.renderpreflights }}` just checks to see if `renderpreflights` is set at all, in which case any value would work, but for the sake of ease of understanding, maybe `true` is easier to interpret?

Author: Fixed.

Next, define the preflight checks specification by adding collectors and analyzers. Optionally, you can add to the default redactors. For more information, see [Define the Preflight Checks Specification](#preflights).

## Define the Preflight Checks Specification {#preflights}

<PreflightsDefine/>

<PreflightsDefineXref/>

<PreflightSbHelmTemplates/>

### Collectors

Add collectors to define information to be collected for analysis during the analyze phase. For example, you can collect information about the MySQL version that is running in a cluster:

```yaml
spec:
      {{ if eq .Values.global.mariadb.enabled false }}
      collectors:
          - mysql:
            collectorName: mysql
            uri: '{{ .Values.global.externalDatabase.user }}:{{ .Values.global.externalDatabase.password }}@tcp({{ .Values.global.externalDatabase.host }}:{{ .Values.global.externalDatabase.port }})/{{ .Values.global.externalDatabase.database }}?tls=false'
      {{ end }}
```

> Replicated recommends using a Helm template for the URI to avoid exposing sensitive information. The Helm template maps to the `values.yaml` file to populate the connection string for the MySQL database.

Author: @xavpaice Is this accurate - that we recommend using the template for URI to avoid exposing sensitive info? I know it's true for KOTS, but not sure about Helm.

Reviewer: We'd recommend using templates to avoid exposing sensitive things anywhere in the chart - not just the URI.  Depends on the URI though - unlikely that http://kots.io is sensitive, for example

<PreflightsDefineXref/>

### Analyzers

<PreflightsAddAnalyzers/>

The following example shows an analyzer for the MySQL collector above. This analyzer specifies a `fail` outcome if the MySQL version is less than the minimum required. Then, specify a message to display that informs your customer of the reasons for the failure and steps they can take to fix the issue.

```yaml
spec:
  collectors:
  - mysql:
      collectorName: mysql
      uri: '{{ .Values.global.externalDatabase.user }}:{{ .Values.global.externalDatabase.password }}@tcp({{ .Values.global.externalDatabase.host }}:{{ .Values.global.externalDatabase.port }})/{{ .Values.global.externalDatabase.database }}?tls=false'
  analyzers:
  - mysql:
      checkName: Must be MySQL 8.x or later
      collectorName: mysql
      outcomes:
      - fail:
          when: connected == false
          message: Cannot connect to MySQL server
      - fail:
          when: version < 8.x
          message: The MySQL server must be at least version 8
      - pass:
          message: The MySQL server is ready
```
<PreflightsDefineXref/>

<AnalyzersNote/>

> ### `strict` Analyzers

Reviewer: `strict` is for KOTS only, it does nothing when installing with Helm

<PreflightsAddStrict/>

The following example shows the `strict` field set to `true` for MySQL versions:

```yaml
spec:
  collectors:
  - mysql:
      collectorName: mysql
      uri: '{{ .Values.global.externalDatabase.user }}:{{ .Values.global.externalDatabase.password }}@tcp({{ .Values.global.externalDatabase.host }}:{{ .Values.global.externalDatabase.port }})/{{ .Values.global.externalDatabase.database }}?tls=false'
  analyzers:
  - mysql:
      strict: true
      checkName: Must be MySQL 8.x or later
      collectorName: mysql
      outcomes:
      - fail:
          when: connected == false
          message: Cannot connect to MySQL server
      - fail:
          when: version < 8.x
          message: The MySQL server must be at least version 8
      - pass:
          message: The MySQL server is ready
```
<PreflightsDefineXref/>

## Redactors

<RedactorsAbout/>

## Example

> The following example shows a preflight support bundle specification in a Secret for a Helm installation. For more examples, see the [Troubleshoot example repository](https://github.com/replicatedhq/troubleshoot/tree/main/examples/preflight) in GitHub.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example shows a preflight specification in a Secret for a Helm installation. For more examples, see the [Troubleshoot example repository](https://github.com/replicatedhq/troubleshoot/tree/main/examples/preflight) in GitHub.
```

Author: Fixed

    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>Advantages</th>
      <td><p>Easy because there is no customization for customer-specific values.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>Supports Templating?</th>
      <td><p>No</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>Limitations</th>
      <td><p>Cannot easily add hooks in the future.</p><p>It becomes burdensome for the customer when there are multiple files that must be run.</p></td>
    </tr>
  </table>

### URLs

Lets you provide preflight checks using one or more URLs:

  <table>
    <tr>
      <th>Use Cases</th>
      <td>Vendor does not need to customize the preflight checks based on a customer's unique values.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>Advantages</th>
      <td>Easy to iterate against as a team.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>Supports Templating?</th>
      <td>Does not support templating, unless templating is being used on the server side.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>Limitations</th>
      <td><p>Does not work for air gap environments.</p><p>Cannot easily add hooks in the future.</p><p>Burdensome for the customer if there are multiple URLs that must be run.</p></td>
    </tr>
  </table>

> ## Define Preflight Checks as Secrets

Reviewer 2: Thinking about the way the content is split up on the page, and I wanted to propose an alternative for your consideration.

One of the main workloads for vendors here is _writing the preflight spec_. That includes writing the Collectors and the Analyzers (and sort of the Redactors) to define your own preflight checks. This is the exact same, regardless of wherever you end up saving the YAML you write. It's also the same for KOTS and Helm distributions. I think this is the really challenging part for vendors where we could put in most of our documentation effort around explanations and examples. 

The other part is _where do I save this preflight spec that I write?_ . And for Helm distributions, that's either a Secret or a Preflight CR, as you've described. 

Maybe there is a way for the headings to reflect these two phases? First, pick where you are going to write it. Then, write the collectors and analyzers and here's how you do it

<ConfigmapNote/>

Any preflight checks you run are dependent on your application needs. This example gives some guidance about how to think about using collectors and analyzers to design preflight checks. For more information about defining preflight checks, see [Collecting Data](https://troubleshoot.sh/docs/collect/)
and [Analyzing Data](https://troubleshoot.sh/docs/analyze/) in the Troubleshoot documentation.

To define preflight checks as a Secret, create a specification using `kind: Secret`. You must include the following fields:

- `Label` - Label the secret definition as `troubleshoot.sh/kind: preflight`
- `stringData` - Specify a `stringData` field with a key named `preflight.yaml` so that the preflight binary can use this Secret when it runs from the CLI

The following example shows preflight checks using a Secret. For more examples, see the [Troubleshoot example repository](https://github.com/replicatedhq/troubleshoot/tree/main/examples/preflight) in GitHub.

> ```yaml

Reviewer 2: I think this example needs a lot more explanation, especially because it's pretty complex. For example, what are each of the collectors collecting? What are analyzers doing?

Then the other big piece I think is the template functions, which are designed to customize the checks based on the specific environment. I wonder if we might need a separate topic or section about templating. To steal the name of the lab that Chuck is working on, maybe that's something like "Adapting Preflights and Support Bundles to Customer Configurations"

As is, I found it a little overwhelming to see this big example up front, without understanding the pieces.

Author: I changed out the templating to Helm, added an About Helm Templates topic, and added more xrefs to the collectors and analyzers throughout all of the Define/Customize topics using a partial.

I also got rid of the big example up front and went with smaller ones for these sections. Then added the big example at the end with an xref to the Troubleshoot site for collector and analyzer explanations.

        - clusterVersion:
            outcomes:
              - fail:
                  when: "< 1.16.0"
                  message: The application requires at least Kubernetes 1.16.0, and recommends 1.18.0.
                  uri: https://kubernetes.io
              - warn:
                  when: "< 1.18.0"
                  message: Your cluster meets the minimum version of Kubernetes, but we recommend you update to 1.18.0 or later.
                  uri: https://kubernetes.io
              - pass:
                  message: Your cluster meets the recommended and required versions of Kubernetes.
        {{ if eq .Values.global.mariadb.enabled false }}
        - mysql:
            checkName: Must be MySQL 8.x or later
            collectorName: mysql
            outcomes:
              - fail:
                  when: connected == false
                  message: Cannot connect to MySQL server
              - fail:
                  when: version < 8.x
                  message: The MySQL server must be at least version 8
              - pass:
                  message: The MySQL server is ready
        {{ end }}
```

> ### Collectors

Author: It does. They were indented because I think the Preflight custom resource section might go away. But I can bump them out for now, and then reorder them if the other section stays. It does apply to both.

Add collectors to define information to be collected for analysis during the analyze phase. For example, you can collect information about the MySQL version that is running in a cluster:

```yaml
   spec:
      collectors:
        - mysql:
        collectorName: mysql
        uri: 'repl{{ ConfigOption "db_user" }}:repl{{ConfigOption "db_password" }}@tcp(repl{{ ConfigOption "db_host" }}:repl{{ConfigOption "db_port" }})/repl{{ ConfigOption "db_name" }}'
```

> Replicated recommends replacing using a template function for the URI to avoid exposing sensitive information. For more information about template functions, see [About Template Functions](/reference/template-functions-about).

Reviewer 2: These template functions do not work with Helm installation (ConfigOption is a replicated template function). These would need to be pointing to something in the Helm values file.

Could also use some additional explanation about what's going on with the template functions, and how they map to the values.yaml file.

Maybe we could also have some simple examples that do not include templating?

Reviewer 2: Do you think it would also be helpful to point to the list of collectors in the troubleshoot docs here? https://troubleshoot.sh/docs/collect/all/? As is, I don't have anywhere else to go from here. So, if I wanted to check the version of MySQL then I'm good. But I'm not empowered to learn more

Author: I changed out the templating to Helm, added an About Helm Templates topic, and added more xrefs to the collectors and analyzers throughout all of the Define/Customize topics using a partial.

import PreflightsAddAnalyzers from "../partials/preflights/_preflights-add-analyzers.mdx"
import PreflightsAddStrict from "../partials/preflights/_preflights-add-strict.mdx"
import PreflightsHelmGuidance from "../partials/preflights/_preflights-helm-guidance.mdx"
import ConfigmapNote from "../partials/preflights/_configmap-note.mdx"

# Define Helm Preflight Checks

 This topic provides a basic understanding and some key considerations about Helm preflight checks to help guide you in enabling them for your application.

## About Helm Preflight Checks

You define preflight checks based on your application needs. Replicated recommends that you use prelight checks to help ensure that your customers' environments support your application _before_ running the installation. 

Preflight checks are not included by default, so you must enable them.
Preflight checks run before running the `helm install` command, without hooks, to confirm the target cluster has the resources required for a successful install.

> When you supply the output of `helm template` to the preflight command as stdin, the command filters the stream and searches for and runs the following specifications:

Author: @xavpaice Why would someone want to use stdin with Helm preflights? Is stdin just a default process when running the `helm template` command? It seems so, since it's not specified with the `helm template oci://REGISTRY/APP_NAME/CHART --values FILENAME.yaml | kubectl preflight -` command. 

And do they have other options than using stdin? SOunds like stdin is the best practice and we'd only want to document that, but a lot of mention was made of stdin in your draft document and I am trying to make sure I understand it and communicate the why/use case clearly.

> When you supply the output of `helm template` to the preflight command as stdin, the command filters the stream and searches for and runs the following specifications:

Author: Also, it feels like this whole paragraph can go away. Is it important for vendors to know what specification types stdin is looking for? And isn't this `helm template` command used for running any of the preflight spec types, including URLs or YAML files?

-  Secrets or ConfigMaps containing preflight specifications
-  Custom resources of `kind: preflight`

You can create a resource that can be read from stdin and still take advantage of Helm templates.

## Specification Types

The following tables can help guide you in deciding which options to use for preflight checks.

### Secrets

Replicated recommends using Secrets to provide preflight checks:

<table>
    <tr>
      <th>Use Cases</th>
      <td><p>Uses helm templating to trigger preflight checks before running the <code>helm install</code> command. This requires that the preflight must be defined in a resource that can be read through stdin.</p><p>Allows customization of the preflight checks based on values unique to the customer.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>Advantages</th>
      <td><p>Allows using template functions in a Secret.</p><p>Secrets do not need to be wrapped in a condition because Secrets are installed in the cluster.</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>Supports Templating?</th>
      <td><p>Yes</p></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>Limitations</th>
      <td><p>Not applicable</p></td>
    </tr>
</table>

> ### Preflight Custom Resource

Author: Is Preflight custom resource a spec type that we want to document? It seems that we really want to steer vendors to using Secrets with templating, which would provide any conditional statements they need. It doesn't seem like the Preflight CR offers any advantage to Helm charts versus Secrets.

If Preflights custom resource is something we want to de-emphasize, could we remove it from the Replicated docs and document it on community instead?

```
Replicated recommends replacing using a template function for the URI to avoid exposing sensitive information. For more information about template functions, see [About Template Functions](/reference/template-functions-about).

### Analyzers
<PreflightsAddAnalyzers/>

### `strict` Analyzers

<PreflightsAddStrict/>

The following example shows a strict analyzer for MySQL versions:

```yaml
spec:
  collectors:
  - mysql:
      collectorName: mysql
      uri: 'repl{{ ConfigOption "db_user" }}:repl{{ConfigOption "db_password" }}@tcp(repl{{ ConfigOption "db_host" }}:repl{{ConfigOption "db_port" }})/repl{{ ConfigOption "db_name" }}'
  analyzers:
  - mysql:
      strict: true
      checkName: Must be MySQL 8.x or later
      collectorName: mysql
      outcomes:
      - fail:
          when: connected == false
          message: Cannot connect to MySQL server
      - fail:
          when: version < 8.x
          message: The MySQL server must be at least version 8
      - pass:
          message: The MySQL server is ready
```

> ## Define a Preflight Custom Resource as a Template

Author: @xavpaice Related to my earlier question, do we want to de-emphasize this spec type? If so, what do you think about moving this procedure over to a Community post?

```yaml
apiVersion: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1
kind: ClusterRole
metadata:
  name: preflights-role
  annotations:
    "helm.sh/hook": pre-install, pre-upgrade
    "helm.sh/hook-weight": "-6"
    "helm.sh/hook-delete-policy": before-hook-creation, hook-succeeded, hook-failed
rules:
  - apiGroups:
      - ""
    resources:
      - "namespaces"
    verbs:
      - "get"
      - "watch"
      - "list"
  - apiGroups:
      - ""
    resources:
      - "nodes"
    verbs:
      - "get"
      - "watch"
      - "list"
  - apiGroups:
      - ""
    resources:
      - "pods"
    verbs:
      - "get"
      - "watch"
      - "list"
      - "create"
  - apiGroups:
      - "apiextensions.k8s.io"
    resources:
      - "customresourcedefinitions"
    verbs:
      - "get"
      - "watch"
      - "list"
  - apiGroups:
      - "storage.k8s.io"
    resources:
      - "storageclasses"
    verbs:
      - "get"
      - "watch"
      - "list"
  - apiGroups:
      - ""
    resources:
      - "pods/log"
    verbs:
      - "get"
      - "list"
```

### ClusterRoleBinding

> The following example shows RBAC settings for `ClusterRoleBinding` with preflight checks. It also shows `preflight-install` and `preflight-upgrade` hooks and weights.

Author: @xavpaice Can you provide more context around how and when to use RBAC with preflight checks? I'm unclear about this and think that vendors might need more guidance.
